---
layout: page
title: Computational Protein Structure
permalink: /Computational_Protein_Structure/
---

# COMPUTATIONAL PROTEIN STRUCTURE

1. Gelly, Jean-Christophe, et al. iPBA: a tool for protein structure comparison using sequence alignment strategies. Nucleic Acids Research 39.suppl_2 (2011): W18-W23.
[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3125758/](www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3125758/)

   >We propose an efficient method for structure comparison, based on a structural alphabet. Protein Blocks (PBs) is a widely used structural alphabet with 16 pentapeptide conformations that can fairly approximate a complete protein chain. Thus a 3D structure can be translated into a 1D sequence of PBs. With a simple Needleman–Wunsch approach and a raw PB substitution matrix, PB-based structural alignments were better than many popular methods. iPBA web server presents an improved alignment approach using (i) specialized PB Substitution Matrices (SM) and (ii) anchor-based alignment methodology. With these developments, the quality of ∼88% of alignments was improved.

1. Remmert, Michael, et al. HHblits: lightning-fast iterative protein sequence searching by HMM-HMM alignment. Nature Methods 9.2 (2012): 173.
[http://toolkit.genzentrum.lmu.de/hhblits/](http://toolkit.genzentrum.lmu.de/hhblits/)
[https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth.1818](https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth.1818)
 
   >Sequence-based protein function and structure prediction depends crucially on sequence-search sensitivity and accuracy of the resulting sequence alignments. We present an open-source, general-purpose tool that represents both query and database sequences by profile hidden Markov models (HMMs): 'HMM-HMM–based lightning-fast iterative sequence search' (HHblits). Compared to the sequence-search tool PSI-BLAST, HHblits is faster owing to its discretized-profile prefilter, has 50–100% higher sensitivity and generates more accurate alignments. 
 
1. Jones, David T., et al. PSICOV: precise structural contact prediction using sparse inverse covariance estimation on large multiple sequence alignments. Bioinformatics 28.2 (2011): 184-190.
[https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article/28/2/184/198108](https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article/28/2/184/198108)

   >Sequence-based contact predictions are usually made by identifying correlated mutations within multiple sequence alignments (MSAs), most commonly through the information-theoretic approach of calculating mutual information between pairs of sites in proteins. These predictions are often inaccurate because the true covariation signal in the MSA is often masked by biases from many ancillary indirect-coupling or phylogenetic effects. Here we present a novel method, PSICOV, which introduces the use of sparse inverse covariance estimation to the problem of protein contact prediction. Our method builds on work which had previously demonstrated corrections for phylogenetic and entropic correlation noise and allows accurate discrimination of direct from indirectly coupled mutation correlations in the MSA. PSICOV displays a mean precision substantially better than the best performing normalized mutual information approach and Bayesian networks. For 118 out of 150 targets, the L/5 (i.e. top-L/5 predictions for a protein of length L) precision for long-range contacts (sequence separation >23) was ≥0.5, which represents an improvement sufficient to be of significant benefit in protein structure prediction or model quality assessment.
 
1. Adhikari, Badri, Jie Hou, and Jianlin Cheng. DNCON2: improved protein contact prediction using two-level deep convolutional neural networks. Bioinformatics 34.9 (2017): 1466-1472.
[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5925776/](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5925776/)

   >Significant improvements in the prediction of protein residue–residue contacts are observed in the recent years. These contacts, predicted using a variety of coevolution-based and machine learning methods, are the key contributors to the recent progress in ab initio protein structure prediction, as demonstrated in the recent CASP experiments. Continuing the development of new methods to reliably predict contact maps is essential to further improve ab initio structure prediction. In this paper we discuss DNCON2, an improved protein contact map predictor based on two-level deep convolutional neural networks. It consists of six convolutional neural networks—the first five predict contacts at 6, 7.5, 8, 8.5 and 10 Å distance thresholds, and the last one uses these five predictions as additional features to predict final contact maps. On the free-modeling datasets in CASP10, 11 and 12 experiments, DNCON2 achieves mean precisions of 35, 50 and 53.4%, respectively, higher than 30.6% by MetaPSICOV on CASP10 dataset, 34% by MetaPSICOV on CASP11 dataset and 46.3% by Raptor-X on CASP12 dataset, when top L/5 long-range contacts are evaluated. We attribute the improved performance of DNCON2 to the inclusion of short- and medium-range contacts into training, two-level approach to prediction, use of the state-of-the-art optimization and activation functions, and a novel deep learning architecture that allows each filter in a convolutional layer to access all the input features of a protein of arbitrary length.
   
1. Xu D, Zhang Y. Ab initio protein structure assembly using continuous structure
fragments and optimized knowledge-based force field. Proteins. 2012
Jul;80(7):1715-35. 
[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22411565] (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22411565)
   >Ab initio protein folding is one of the major unsolved problems in computational biology owing to the difficulties in force field design and conformational search. We developed a novel program, QUARK, for template-free protein structure prediction. Query sequences are first broken into fragments of 1-20 residues where multiple fragment structures are retrieved at each position from unrelated experimental structures. Full-length structure models are then assembled from fragments using replica-exchange Monte Carlo simulations, which are guided by a composite knowledge-based force field. A number of novel energy terms and Monte Carlo movements are introduced and the particular contributions to enhancing the efficiency of both force field and search engine are analyzed in detail. QUARK prediction procedure is depicted and tested on the structure modeling of 145 nonhomologous proteins. Although no global templates are used and all fragments from experimental structures with template modeling score >0.5 are excluded, QUARK can successfully construct 3D models of correct folds in one-third cases of short proteins up to 100 residues. In the ninth community-wide Critical Assessment of protein Structure Prediction experiment, QUARK server outperformed the second and third best servers by 18 and 47% based on the cumulative Z-score of global distance test-total scores in the FM category. Although ab initio protein folding remains a significant challenge, these data demonstrate new progress toward the solution of the most important problem in the field.
   
1. Ovchinnikov S, Park H, Varghese N, Huang PS, Pavlopoulos GA, Kim DE, Kamisetty
H, Kyrpides NC, Baker D. Protein structure determination using metagenome
sequence data. Science. 2017 Jan 20;355(6322):294-298.
[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28104891](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28104891)
   >Despite decades of work by structural biologists, there are still ~5200 protein families with unknown structure outside the range of comparative modeling. We show that Rosetta structure prediction guided by residue-residue contacts inferred from evolutionary information can accurately model proteins that belong to large families and that metagenome sequence data more than triple the number of protein families with sufficient sequences for accurate modeling. We then integrate metagenome data, contact-based structure matching, and Rosetta structure calculations to generate models for 614 protein families with currently unknown structures; 206 are membrane proteins and 137 have folds not represented in the Protein Data Bank. This approach provides the representative models for large protein families originally envisioned as the goal of the Protein Structure Initiative at a fraction of the cost.

1. Wang S, Peng J, Ma J, Xu J. Protein Secondary Structure Prediction Using Deep 
Convolutional Neural Fields. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 11;6:18962.
[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26752681](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26752681)
   
   >Protein secondary structure (SS) prediction is important for studying protein structure and function. When only the sequence (profile) information is used as input feature, currently the best predictors can obtain ~80% Q3 accuracy, which has not been improved in the past decade. Here we present DeepCNF (Deep Convolutional Neural Fields) for protein SS prediction. DeepCNF is a Deep Learning extension of Conditional Neural Fields (CNF), which is an integration of Conditional Random Fields (CRF) and shallow neural networks. DeepCNF can model not only complex sequence-structure relationship by a deep hierarchical architecture, but also interdependency between adjacent SS labels, so it is much more powerful than CNF. Experimental results show that DeepCNF can obtain ~84% Q3 accuracy, ~85% SOV score, and ~72% Q8 accuracy, respectively, on the CASP and CAMEO test proteins, greatly outperforming currently popular predictors. As a general framework, DeepCNF can be used to predict other protein structure properties such as contact number, disorder regions, and solvent accessibility.

1. Andrew W Senior, Richard Evans, John Jumper, James Kirkpatrick, Laurent Sifre, Tim Green, Chongli Qin, Augustin Žídek, Alexander W R Nelson, Alex Bridgland, Hugo Penedones, Stig Petersen, Karen Simonyan, Steve Crossan, Pushmeet Kohli, David T Jones, David Silver, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Demis Hassabis. Improved protein structure prediction using potentials from deep learning.  Nature. 2020 577(7792):706-710
[https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31942072/](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31942072/)

   >Protein structure prediction can be used to determine the three-dimensional shape of a protein from its amino acid sequence. This problem is of fundamental importance as the structure of a protein largely determines its function; however, protein structures can be difficult to determine experimentally. Considerable progress has recently been made by leveraging genetic information. It is possible to infer which amino acid residues are in contact by analysing covariation in homologous sequences, which aids in the prediction of protein structures. Here we show that we can train a neural network to make accurate predictions of the distances between pairs of residues, which convey more information about the structure than contact predictions. Using this information, we construct a potential of mean force that can accurately describe the shape of a protein. We find that the resulting potential can be optimized by a simple gradient descent algorithm to generate structures without complex sampling procedures. The resulting system, named AlphaFold, achieves high accuracy, even for sequences with fewer homologous sequences. In the recent Critical Assessment of Protein Structure Prediction (CASP13)-a blind assessment of the state of the field-AlphaFold created high-accuracy structures (with template modelling (TM) scores of 0.7 or higher) for 24 out of 43 free modelling domains, whereas the next best method, which used sampling and contact information, achieved such accuracy for only 14 out of 43 domains. AlphaFold represents a considerable advance in protein-structure prediction. We expect this increased accuracy to enable insights into the function and malfunction of proteins, especially in cases for which no structures for homologous proteins have been experimentally determined.
