---
layout: page
title: Genomics
permalink: /Genomics/
---

# Genomics

1. Ernst J, Kellis M. ChromHMM: automating chromatin-state discovery and characterization. 2012. Nat Methods. 2012 Feb 28;9(3):215-6. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.1906. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3577932/.

   >ChromHMM is an automated computational system for learning chromatin states, characterizing their biological functions and correlations with large-scale functional datasets, and visualizing the resulting genome-wide maps of chromatin state annotations. The computational challenge of learning chromatin state models from large numbers of chromatin modification datasets in multiple cell types requires extensive bioinformatics expertise, and this made chromatin state annotation rather inaccessible to the public. ChromHMM was created to address this issue, and now chromatin state annotation can be understood by a larger audience.
   
1. Alexandrov LB, Nik-Zainal S, Wedge DC, Aparicio SA, Behjati S, Biankin AV, Bignell GR, Bolli N, Borg A, Børresen-Dale AL, Boyault S, Burkhardt B, Butler AP, Caldas C, Davies HR, Desmedt C, Eils R, Eyfjörd JE, Foekens JA, Greaves M, Hosoda F, Hutter B, Ilicic T, Imbeaud S, Imielinski M, Jäger N, Jones DT, Jones D, Knappskog S, Kool M, Lakhani SR, López-Otín C, Martin S, Munshi NC, Nakamura H, Northcott PA, Pajic M, Papaemmanuil E, Paradiso A, Pearson JV, Puente XS, Raine K, Ramakrishna M, Richardson AL, Richter J, Rosenstiel P, Schlesner M, Schumacher TN, Span PN, Teague JW, Totoki Y, Tutt AN, Valdés-Mas R, van Buuren MM, van 't Veer L, Vincent-Salomon A, Waddell N, Yates LR; Australian Pancreatic Cancer Genome Initiative; ICGC Breast Cancer Consortium; ICGC MMML-Seq Consortium; ICGC PedBrain, Zucman-Rossi J, Futreal PA, McDermott U, Lichter P, Meyerson M, Grimmond SM, Siebert R, Campo E, Shibata T, Pfister SM, Campbell PJ, Stratton MR.  Signatures of mutational processes in human cancer. Nature. 2013 Aug 22;500(7463):415-21. doi: 10.1038/nature12477. Epub 2013 Aug 14. https://www.nature.com/articles/nature12477.

   >All cancers are caused by somatic mutations; however, understanding of the biological processes generating these mutations is limited. The catalogue of somatic mutations from a cancer genome bears the signatures of the mutational processes that have been operative. Here we analysed 4,938,362 mutations from 7,042 cancers and extracted more than 20 distinct mutational signatures. The results reveal the diversity of mutational processes underlying the development of cancer, with potential implications for understanding of cancer aetiology, prevention and therapy.
   
1. Nik-Zainal S, Van Loo P, Wedge DC, Alexandrov LB, Greenman CD, Lau KW, Raine K, Jones D, Marshall J, Ramakrishna M, Shlien A, Cooke SL, Hinton J, Menzies A, Stebbings LA, Leroy C, Jia M, Rance R, Mudie LJ, Gamble SJ, Stephens PJ, McLaren S, Tarpey PS, Papaemmanuil E, Davies HR, Varela I, McBride DJ, Bignell GR, Leung K, Butler AP, Teague JW, Martin S, Jönsson G, Mariani O, Boyault S, Miron P, Fatima A, Langerød A, Aparicio SA, Tutt A, Sieuwerts AM, Borg Å, Thomas G, Salomon AV, Richardson AL, Børresen-Dale AL, Futreal PA, Stratton MR, Campbell PJ; Breast Cancer Working Group of the International Cancer Genome Consortium. The life history of 21 breast cancers. Cell. 2012 May 25;149(5):994-1007. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.04.023. Epub 2012 May 17. https://www.cell.com/abstract/S0092-8674%2812%2900527-2.

   >Cancer evolves dynamically as clonal expansions supersede one another driven by shifting selective pressures, mutational processes, and disrupted cancer genes. These processes mark the genome, such that a cancer's life history is encrypted in the somatic mutations present. We developed algorithms to decipher this narrative and applied them to 21 breast cancers. The highlights and results are discussed in this paper.
   
1. Michael S. Lawrence, Petar Stojanov[…] Gad Getz.  Mutational heterogeneity in cancer and the search for new cancer-associated genes. Nature volume499, pages214–218 (11 July 2013) doi:10.1038/nature12213. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23770567.

   >Major international projects are underway that are aimed at creating a comprehensive catalogue of all the genes responsible for the initiation and progression of cancer. These studies involve the sequencing of matched tumour-normal samples followed by mathematical analysis to identify those genes in which mutations occur more frequently than expected by random chance. Here we describe a fundamental problem with cancer genome studies: as the sample size increases, the list of putatively significant genes produced by current analytical methods burgeons into the hundreds. The list includes many implausible genes (such as those encoding olfactory receptors and the muscle protein titin), suggesting extensive false-positive findings that overshadow true driver events. We show that this problem stems largely from mutational heterogeneity and provide a novel analytical methodology, MutSigCV, for resolving the problem. 

1. Discovery and saturation analysis of cancer genes across 21 tumour types. Lawrence MS, Stojanov P, Mermel CH, Robinson JT, Garraway LA, Golub TR, Meyerson M, Gabriel SB,Lander ES, Getz G. Nature. 2014 Jan 23; 505(7484):495-501. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24390350.

      >Although a few cancer genes are mutated in a high proportion of tumours of a given type (>20%), most are mutated at intermediate frequencies (2-20%). To explore the feasibility of creating a comprehensive catalogue of cancer genes, we analysed somatic point mutations in exome sequences from 4,742 human cancers and their matched normal-tissue samples across 21 cancer types. We found that large-scale genomic analysis can identify nearly all known cancer genes in these tumour types, and down-sampling analysis indicates that larger sample sizes will reveal many more genes mutated at clinically important frequencies. We estimate that near-saturation may be achieved with 600-5,000 samples per tumour type, depending on background mutation frequency. The results may help to guide the next stage of cancer genomics.

1. Zhou J, Troyanskaya O.  2015. Predicting effects of noncoding variants with deep learning-based sequence model. Nat Methods. 2015 Oct;12(10):931-4. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.3547. Epub 2015 Aug 24. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26301843.

      >Identifying functional effects of noncoding variants is a major challenge in human genetics. To predict the noncoding-variant effects de novo from sequence, we developed a deep learning-based algorithmic framework, DeepSEA (http://deepsea.princeton.edu/), that directly learns a regulatory sequence code from large-scale chromatin-profiling data, enabling prediction of chromatin effects of sequence alterations with single-nucleotide sensitivity. We further used this capability to improve prioritization of functional variants including expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) and disease-associated variants.

1. David Botstein,1 and Gerald R. Fink. Yeast: An Experimental Organism for 21st Century Biology. Genetics. 2011 Nov; 189(3): 695–704. doi:  10.1534/genetics.111.130765. http://www.genetics.org/content/189/3/695.article-info.

      >In this essay, we revisit the status of yeast as a model system for biology. We first summarize important contributions of yeast to eukaryotic biology that we anticipated in 1988 in our first article on the subject. We then describe transformative developments that we did not anticipate, most of which followed the publication of the complete genomic sequence of Saccharomyces cerevisiae in 1996. In the intervening 23 years it appears to us that yeast has graduated from a position as the premier model for eukaryotic cell biology to become the pioneer organism that has facilitated the establishment of the entirely new fields of study called “functional genomics” and “systems biology.” These new fields look beyond the functions of individual genes and proteins, focusing on how these interact and work together to determine the properties of living cells and organisms.

1. Y. Hao et al., Semi-supervised Learning Predicts Approximately One Third of the Alternative Splicing Isoforms as Functional Proteins. Cell Rep. 12, 183–189 (2015). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26146086

   >Alternative splicing acts on transcripts from almost all human multi-exon genes. Notwithstanding its ubiquity, fundamental ramifications of splicing on protein expression remain unresolved. The number and identity of spliced transcripts that form stably folded proteins remain the sources of considerable debate, due largely to low coverage of experimental methods and the resulting absence of negative data. We circumvent this issue by developing a semi-supervised learning algorithm, positive unlabeled learning for splicing elucidation (PULSE; http://www.kimlab.org/software/pulse), which uses 48 features spanning various categories. We validated its accuracy on sets of bona fide protein isoforms and directly on mass spectrometry (MS) spectra for an overall AU-ROC of 0.85, we predict that around 32% of "exon skipping" alternative splicing events produce stable proteins, suggesting that the process engenders a significant number of previously uncharacterized proteins, and we also provide insights into the distribution of positive isoforms in various functional classes and into the structural effects of alternative splicing.

1. E. E. Schadt, S. Woo, K. Hao, Bayesian method to predict individual SNP genotypes from gene expression data. Nat. Genet. 44, 603–608 (2012) https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22484626

   >RNA profiling can be used to capture the expression patterns of many genes that are associated with expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs). Employing published putative cis eQTLs, we developed a Bayesian approach to predict SNP genotypes that is based only on RNA expression data. We show that predicted genotypes can accurately and uniquely identify individuals in large populations. When inferring genotypes from an expression data set using eQTLs of the same tissue type (but from an independent cohort), we were able to resolve 99% of the identities of individuals in the cohort at P(adjusted) ≤ 1 × 10(-5). When eQTLs derived from one tissue were used to predict genotypes using expression data from a different tissue, the identities of 90% of the study subjects could be resolved at P(adjusted) ≤ 1 × 10(-5). We discuss the implications of deriving genotypic information from RNA data deposited in the public domain.

1. J. Dutkowski et al., A gene ontology inferred from molecular networks. Nat. Biotechnol. 31, 38–45 (2013). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23242164

   >Ontologies have proven very useful for capturing knowledge as a hierarchy of terms and their interrelationships. In biology a major challenge has been to construct ontologies of gene function given incomplete biological knowledge and inconsistencies in how this knowledge is manually curated. Here we show that large networks of gene and protein interactions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae can be used to infer an ontology whose coverage and power are equivalent to those of the manually curated Gene Ontology (GO); in fact, the network-extracted ontology (NeXO) contains 4,123 biological terms and 5,766 term-term relations, capturing 58% of known cellular components. We also explore robust NeXO terms and term relations that were initially not cataloged in GO, a number of which have now been added based on our analysis, and using quantitative genetic interaction profiling and chemogenomics, we find further support for many of the uncharacterized terms identified by NeXO, including multisubunit structures related to protein trafficking or mitochondrial function. This work enables a shift from using ontologies to evaluate data to using data to construct and evaluate ontologies.

1. M. Hofree, J. P. Shen, H. Carter, A. Gross, T. Ideker, Network-based stratification of tumor mutations. Nat. Methods. 10, 1108–1115 (2013). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3866081/

   >Many forms of cancer have multiple subtypes with different causes and clinical outcomes. Somatic tumor genomes provide a rich new source of data for uncovering these subtypes but have proven difficult to compare as two tumors rarely share the same mutations. Here, we introduce a method called Network Based Stratification (NBS) which integrates somatic tumor genomes with gene networks. This approach allows for stratification of cancer into informative subtypes by clustering together patients with mutations in similar network regions. We demonstrate NBS in ovarian, uterine and lung cancer cohorts from The Cancer Genome Atlas, and for each tissue, NBS identifies clear subtypes that are predictive of clinical outcomes such as patient survival, response to therapy or tumor histology. We identify network regions characteristic of each subtype and show how mutation-derived subtypes can be used to train an mRNA expression signature which provides similar information in the absence of DNA sequence.

1. E. R. Gamazon et al., A gene-based association method for mapping traits using reference transcriptome data. Nat. Genet. 47, 1091–1098 (2015). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4552594/

   >Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified thousands of variants robustly associated with complex traits. However, the biological mechanisms underlying these associations are, in general, not well understood. We propose a gene-based association method called PrediXcan that directly tests the molecular mechanisms through which genetic variation affects phenotype. PrediXcan enjoys the benefits of gene-based approaches such as reduced multiple testing burden and a principled approach to the design of follow-up experiments. Our results demonstrate that PrediXcan can detect known and novel genes associated with disease traits and provide insights into the mechanism of these associations.

1. C. Dwork et al., STATISTICS. The reusable holdout: Preserving validity in adaptive data analysis. Science. 349, 636–638 (2015). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26250683

   >Misapplication of statistical data analysis is a common cause of spurious discoveries in scientific research. Existing approaches to ensuring the validity of inferences drawn from data assume a fixed procedure to be performed, selected before the data are examined. In common practice, however, data analysis is an intrinsically adaptive process, with new analyses generated on the basis of data exploration, as well as the results of previous analyses on the same data. We demonstrate a new approach for addressing the challenges of adaptivity based on insights from privacy-preserving data analysis. As an application, we show how to safely reuse a holdout data set many times to validate the results of adaptively chosen analyses.

1. H. Y. Xiong et al., RNA splicing. The human splicing code reveals new insights into the genetic determinants of disease. Science. 347, 1254806 (2015). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4362528/

   >Advancing whole-genome precision medicine requires understanding how gene expression is altered by genetic variants, especially those that are outside of protein-coding regions. We developed a computational technique that scores how strongly genetic variants alter RNA splicing, a critical step in gene expression whose disruption contributes to many diseases, including cancers and neurological disorders. A genome-wide analysis reveals tens of thousands of variants that alter splicing and are enriched with a wide range of known diseases. Our results provide insight into the genetic basis of spinal muscular atrophy, hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer and autism spectrum disorder.

1. R. Middleton et al., IRFinder: assessing the impact of intron retention on mammalian gene expression. Genome Biol. 18, 51 (2017). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28298237

   >Intron retention (IR) occurs when an intron is transcribed into pre-mRNA and remains in the final mRNA. We have developed a program and database called IRFinder to accurately detect IR from mRNA sequencing data. Analysis of 2573 samples showed that IR occurs in all tissues analyzed, affects over 80% of all coding genes and is associated with cell differentiation and the cell cycle. Frequently retained introns are enriched for specific RNA binding protein sites and are often retained in clusters in the same gene. IR is associated with lower protein levels and intron-retaining transcripts that escape nonsense-mediated decay are not actively translated.

1. T. A. Hopf et al., Mutation effects predicted from sequence co-variation. Nat. Biotechnol. 35, 128–135 (2017). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28092658

   >Many high-throughput experimental technologies have been developed to assess the effects of large numbers of mutations (variation) on phenotypes. However, designing functional assays for these methods is challenging, and systematic testing of all combinations is impossible, so robust methods to predict the effects of genetic variation are needed. Most prediction methods exploit evolutionary sequence conservation but do not consider the interdependencies of residues or bases. We present EVmutation, an unsupervised statistical method for predicting the effects of mutations that explicitly captures residue dependencies between positions. We validate EVmutation by comparing its predictions with outcomes of high-throughput mutagenesis experiments and measurements of human disease mutations and show that it outperforms methods that do not account for epistasis. EVmutation can be used to assess the quantitative effects of mutations in genes of any organism, and we provide pre-computed predictions for ∼7,000 human proteins at http://evmutation.org/.

1. N. Beerenwinkel, R. F. Schwarz, M. Gerstung, F. Markowetz, Cancer evolution: mathematical models and computational inference. Syst. Biol. 64, e1–25 (2015). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25293804

   >Cancer is a somatic evolutionary process characterized by the accumulation of mutations, which contribute to tumor growth, clinical progression, immune escape, and drug resistance development. Evolutionary theory can be used to analyze the dynamics of tumor cell populations and to make inference about the evolutionary history of a tumor from molecular data. We review recent approaches to modeling the evolution of cancer, including population dynamics models of tumor initiation and progression, phylogenetic methods to model the evolutionary relationship between tumor subclones, and probabilistic graphical models to describe dependencies among mutations. Evolutionary modeling helps to understand how tumors arise and will also play an increasingly important prognostic role in predicting disease progression and the outcome of medical interventions, such as targeted therapy.

1. M. M. Hoffman et al., Unsupervised pattern discovery in human chromatin structure through genomic segmentation. Nat. Methods. 9, 473–476 (2012). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3340533/

   >We applied a dynamic Bayesian network method that identifies joint patterns from multiple functional genomics experiments to ChIP-seq histone modification and transcription factor data, and DNaseI-seq and FAIRE-seq open chromatin readouts from the human cell line K562. In an unsupervised fashion, we identified patterns associated with transcription start sites, gene ends, enhancers, CTCF elements, and repressed regions. Software and genome browser tracks are at http://noble.gs.washington.edu/proj/segway/.

1. Chong Z, Ruan J, Gao M, Zhou W, Chen T, Fan X, Ding L, Lee AY, Boutros P, Chen J, Chen K. 2017.  novoBreak: local assembly for breakpoint detection in cancer genomes. Nature Methods volume14, pages65–67 (2017) doi:10.1038/nmeth.4084. https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth.4084.

      >We present novoBreak, a genome-wide local assembly algorithm that discovers somatic and germline structural variation breakpoints in whole-genome sequencing data. novoBreak consistently outperformed existing algorithms on real cancer genome data and on synthetic tumors in the ICGC-TCGA DREAM 8.5 Somatic Mutation Calling Challenge primarily because it more effectively utilized reads spanning breakpoints. novoBreak also demonstrated great sensitivity in identifying short insertions and deletions.
      
1. You, Ronghui, et al. "GOLabeler: Improving Sequence-based Large-scale Protein Function Prediction by Learning to Rank." bioRxiv (2017): 145763. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29522145.

      >The key of this method is to extract not only homology information but also diverse, deep-rooted information/evidence from sequence inputs and integrate them into a predictor in a both effective and efficient manner. We propose GOLabeler, which integrates five component classifiers, trained from different features, including GO term frequency, sequence alignment, amino acid trigram, domains and motifs, and biophysical properties, etc., in the framework of learning to rank (LTR), a paradigm of machine learning, especially powerful for multilabel classification.  The empirical results obtained by examining GOLabeler extensively and thoroughly by using large-scale datasets revealed numerous favorable aspects of GOLabeler, including significant performance advantage over state-of-the-art AFP methods.

1. Gong, Qingtian, Wei Ning, and Weidong Tian. "GoFDR: a sequence alignment based method for predicting protein functions." Methods 93 (2016): 3-14. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26277418.

      >In this study, we developed a method named GoFDR for predicting Gene Ontology (GO)-based protein functions. The input for GoFDR is simply a query sequence-based multiple sequence alignment (MSA) produced by PSI-BLAST. For each GO term annotated to the sequences in the MSA, GoFDR identifies a number of functionally discriminating residues (FDRs) specific to the GO term, and scores the query sequence using a position specific scoring matrix (PSSM) constructed for the FDRs. The raw score is then converted into a probability score according to a score-to-probability table prepared from training sequences. GoFDR outperformed three sequence-based methods for predicting GO functions in a benchmark of 18,520 sequences. In addition, GoFDR was ranked one of the top methods according to the preliminary evaluation report released by the 2nd Critical Assessment of Function Annotation (CAFA2) project. Finally, we applied GoFDR to the complete human proteome sequences, and showed that the predictions made by GoFDR with high confidence significantly expanded current annotations of human proteome. As such, GoFDR is of great value not only for annotating protein functions in newly sequenced genomes, but also for characterizing the function of proteins of interest.

1. Tapio Pahikkala. Antti Airola.  RLScore: Regularized Least-Squares Learners. Journal of Machine Learning Research 17 (2016) 1-5. http://www.jmlr.org/papers/volume17/16-470/16-470.pdf.

      >RLScore is a Python open source module for kernel based machine learning. The library
provides implementations of several regularized least-squares (RLS) type of learners. RLS
methods for regression and classification, ranking, greedy feature selection, multi-task and
zero-shot learning, and unsupervised classification are included. Matrix algebra based
computational short-cuts are used to ensure efficiency of both training and cross-validation.
A simple API and extensive tutorials allow for easy use of RLScore.
   
1. Pertea M, Pertea GM, Antonescu CM, Chang TC, Mendell JT, Salzberg SL.
StringTie enables improved reconstruction of a transcriptome from RNA-seq reads. 
Nat Biotechnol. 2015 Mar;33(3):290-5. doi: 10.1038/nbt.3122. Epub 2015 Feb 18.
[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25690850](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25690850)

   >Methods used to sequence the transcriptome often produce more than 200 million short sequences. We introduce StringTie, a computational method that applies a network flow algorithm originally developed in optimization theory, together with optional de novo assembly, to assemble these complex data sets into transcripts. When used to analyze both simulated and real data sets, StringTie produces more complete and accurate reconstructions of genes and better estimates of expression levels, compared with other leading transcript assembly programs including Cufflinks, IsoLasso, Scripture and Traph. For example, on 90 million reads from human blood, StringTie correctly assembled 10,990 transcripts, whereas the next best assembly was of 7,187 transcripts by Cufflinks, which is a 53% increase in transcripts assembled. On a simulated data set, StringTie correctly assembled 7,559 transcripts, which is 20% more than the 6,310 assembled by Cufflinks. As well as producing a more complete transcriptome assembly, StringTie runs faster on all data sets tested to date compared with other assembly software, including Cufflinks.
   
1. Kim D, Paggi JM, Park C, Bennett C, Salzberg SL. Graph-based genome alignment 
and genotyping with HISAT2 and HISAT-genotype. Nat Biotechnol. 2019
Aug;37(8):907-915. 
[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31375807](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31375807)

   >The human reference genome represents only a small number of individuals, which limits its usefulness for genotyping. We present a method named HISAT2 (hierarchical indexing for spliced alignment of transcripts 2) that can align both DNA and RNA sequences using a graph Ferragina Manzini index. We use HISAT2 to represent and search an expanded model of the human reference genome in which over 14.5 million genomic variants in combination with haplotypes are incorporated into the data structure used for searching and alignment. We benchmark HISAT2 using simulated and real datasets to demonstrate that our strategy of representing a population of genomes, together with a fast, memory-efficient search algorithm, provides more detailed and accurate variant analyses than other methods. We apply HISAT2 for HLA typing and DNA fingerprinting; both applications form part of the HISAT-genotype software that enables analysis of haplotype-resolved genes or genomic regions. HISAT-genotype outperforms other computational methods and matches or exceeds the performance of laboratory-based assays.
   
1. Alipanahi B, Delong A, Weirauch MT, Frey BJ.  2015 Predicting the sequence specificities of DNA- and RNA-binding proteins by deep learning. Nat Biotechnol. 2015 Aug;33(8):831-8. doi: 10.1038/nbt.3300. Epub 2015 Jul 27. https://www.nature.com/articles/nbt.3300.

      >Knowing the sequence specificities of DNA- and RNA-binding proteins is essential for developing models of the regulatory processes in biological systems and for identifying causal disease variants. Here we show that sequence specificities can be ascertained from experimental data with 'deep learning' techniques, which offer a scalable, flexible and unified computational approach for pattern discovery. Using a diverse array of experimental data and evaluation metrics, we find that deep learning outperforms other state-of-the-art methods, even when training on in vitro data and testing on in vivo data. We call this approach DeepBind and have built a stand-alone software tool that is fully automatic and handles millions of sequences per experiment. Specificities determined by DeepBind are readily visualized as a weighted ensemble of position weight matrices or as a 'mutation map' that indicates how variations affect binding within a specific sequence.

1. Dobin A, Gingeras TR. Mapping RNA-seq Reads with STAR. Curr Protoc
Bioinformatics. 2015 Sep 3;51:11.14.1-11.14.19.
[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26334920](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26334920)

   >Mapping of large sets of high-throughput sequencing reads to a reference genome is one of the foundational steps in RNA-seq data analysis. The STAR software package performs this task with high levels of accuracy and speed. In addition to detecting annotated and novel splice junctions, STAR is capable of discovering more complex RNA sequence arrangements, such as chimeric and circular RNA. STAR can align spliced sequences of any length with moderate error rates, providing scalability for emerging sequencing technologies. STAR generates output files that can be used for many downstream analyses such as transcript/gene expression quantification, differential gene expression, novel isoform reconstruction, and signal visualization. In this unit, we describe computational protocols that produce various output files, use different RNA-seq datatypes, and utilize different mapping strategies. STAR is open source software that can be run on Unix, Linux, or Mac OS X systems.

1. Ryan R Wick, Louise M Judd, Claire L Gorrie, Kathryn E Holt. Unicycler: Resolving bacterial genome assemblies from short and long sequencing reads.  PLoS Computational Biology. 2017 13(6):e1005595.
[https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28594827/](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28594827/)

   >The Illumina DNA sequencing platform generates accurate but short reads, which can be used to produce accurate but fragmented genome assemblies. Pacific Biosciences and Oxford Nanopore Technologies DNA sequencing platforms generate long reads that can produce complete genome assemblies, but the sequencing is more expensive and error-prone. There is significant interest in combining data from these complementary sequencing technologies to generate more accurate "hybrid" assemblies. However, few tools exist that truly leverage the benefits of both types of data, namely the accuracy of short reads and the structural resolving power of long reads. Here we present Unicycler, a new tool for assembling bacterial genomes from a combination of short and long reads, which produces assemblies that are accurate, complete and cost-effective. Unicycler builds an initial assembly graph from short reads using the de novo assembler SPAdes and then simplifies the graph using information from short and long reads. Unicycler uses a novel semi-global aligner to align long reads to the assembly graph. Tests on both synthetic and real reads show Unicycler can assemble larger contigs with fewer misassemblies than other hybrid assemblers, even when long-read depth and accuracy are low. Unicycler is open source (GPLv3) and available at github.com/rrwick/Unicycler.
   
1. Uri Ben-David, Benjamin Siransosian, Gavin Ha, ..., Todd R Golub.  Genetic and transcriptional evolution alters cancer cell line drug response.  Nature. 2018 560(7718):325-330. 
[https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30089904/](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30089904/)

   >Human cancer cell lines are the workhorse of cancer research. Although cell lines are known to evolve in culture, the extent of the resultant genetic and transcriptional heterogeneity and its functional consequences remain understudied. Here we use genomic analyses of 106 human cell lines grown in two laboratories to show extensive clonal diversity. Further comprehensive genomic characterization of 27 strains of the common breast cancer cell line MCF7 uncovered rapid genetic diversification. Similar results were obtained with multiple strains of 13 additional cell lines. Notably, genetic changes were associated with differential activation of gene expression programs and marked differences in cell morphology and proliferation. Barcoding experiments showed that cell line evolution occurs as a result of positive clonal selection that is highly sensitive to culture conditions. Analyses of single-cell-derived clones demonstrated that continuous instability quickly translates into heterogeneity of the cell line. When the 27 MCF7 strains were tested against 321 anti-cancer compounds, we uncovered considerably different drug responses: at least 75% of compounds that strongly inhibited some strains were completely inactive in others. This study documents the extent, origins and consequences of genetic variation within cell lines, and provides a framework for researchers to measure such variation in efforts to support maximally reproducible cancer research.

1. Rubinacci, S., Ribeiro, D.M., Hofmeister, R.J. et al. Efficient phasing and imputation of low-coverage sequencing data using large reference panels. Nat Genet 53, 120–126 (2021). 
[https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-020-00756-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-020-00756-0)

   >Low-coverage whole-genome sequencing followed by imputation has been proposed as a cost-effective genotyping approach for disease and population genetics studies. However, its competitiveness against SNP arrays is undermined because current imputation methods are computationally expensive and unable to leverage large reference panels. Here, we describe a method, GLIMPSE, for phasing and imputation of low-coverage sequencing datasets from modern reference panels. We demonstrate its remarkable performance across different coverages and human populations. GLIMPSE achieves imputation of a genome for less than US$1 in computational cost, considerably outperforming other methods and improving imputation accuracy over the full allele frequency range. As a proof of concept, we show that 1× coverage enables effective gene expression association studies and outperforms dense SNP arrays in rare variant burden tests. Overall, this study illustrates the promising potential of low-coverage imputation and suggests a paradigm shift in the design of future genomic studies.

1. Davies, R.W., Kucka, M., Su, D. et al. Rapid genotype imputation from sequence with reference panels. Nat Genet 53, 1104–1111 (2021). [https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-021-00877-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-021-00877-0)

   >Inexpensive genotyping methods are essential to modern genomics. Here we present QUILT, which performs diploid genotype imputation using low-coverage whole-genome sequence data. QUILT employs Gibbs sampling to partition reads into maternal and paternal sets, facilitating rapid haploid imputation using large reference panels. We show this partitioning to be accurate over many megabases, enabling highly accurate imputation close to theoretical limits and outperforming existing methods. Moreover, QUILT can impute accurately using diverse technologies, including long reads from Oxford Nanopore Technologies, and a new form of low-cost barcoded Illumina sequencing called haplotagging, with the latter showing improved accuracy at low coverages. Relative to DNA genotyping microarrays, QUILT offers improved accuracy at reduced cost, particularly for diverse populations that are traditionally underserved in modern genomic analyses, with accuracy nearly doubling at rare SNPs. Finally, QUILT can accurately impute (four-digit) human leukocyte antigen types, the first such method from low-coverage sequence data.

1. de Goede OM, Nachun DC, Ferraro NM, Gloudemans MJ, Rao AS, Smail C, Eulalio TY, Aguet F, Ng B, Xu J, Barbeira AN. Population-scale tissue transcriptomics maps long non-coding RNAs to complex disease. Cell. 2021 May 13;184(10):2633-48. 
[https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33864768/](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33864768/)

   >Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) genes have well-established and important impacts on molecular and cellular functions. However, among the thousands of lncRNA genes, it is still a major challenge to identify the subset with disease or trait relevance. To systematically characterize these lncRNA genes, we used Genotype Tissue Expression (GTEx) project v8 genetic and multi-tissue transcriptomic data to profile the expression, genetic regulation, cellular contexts, and trait associations of 14,100 lncRNA genes across 49 tissues for 101 distinct complex genetic traits. Using these approaches, we identified 1,432 lncRNA gene-trait associations, 800 of which were not explained by stronger effects of neighboring protein-coding genes. This included associations between lncRNA quantitative trait loci and inflammatory bowel disease, type 1 and type 2 diabetes, and coronary artery disease, as well as rare variant associations to body mass index.

1. Castel SE, Aguet F, Mohammadi P, Ardlie KG, Lappalainen T. A vast resource of allelic expression data spanning human tissues. Genome biology. 2020 Dec;21(1):1-2.
[https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32912332/](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32912332/)

   >Allele expression (AE) analysis robustly measures cis-regulatory effects. Here, we present and demonstrate the utility of a vast AE resource generated from the GTEx v8 release, containing 15,253 samples spanning 54 human tissues for a total of 431 million measurements of AE at the SNP level and 153 million measurements at the haplotype level. In addition, we develop an extension of our tool phASER that allows effect sizes of cis-regulatory variants to be estimated using haplotype-level AE data. This AE resource is the largest to date, and we are able to make haplotype-level data publicly available. We anticipate that the availability of this resource will enable future studies of regulatory variation across human tissues.

1. Müller NF, Wagner C, Frazar CD, Roychoudhury P, Lee J, Moncla LH, Pelle B, Richardson M, Ryke E, Xie H, Shrestha L. Viral genomes reveal patterns of the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak in Washington State. Science Translational Medicine. 2021 May 26;13(595).
[https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33941621/](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33941621/)

   >The rapid spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has gravely affected societies around the world. Outbreaks in different parts of the globe have been shaped by repeated introductions of new viral lineages and subsequent local transmission of those lineages. Here, we sequenced 3940 SARS-CoV-2 viral genomes from Washington State (USA) to characterize how the spread of SARS-CoV-2 in Washington State in early 2020 was shaped by differences in timing of mitigation strategies across counties and by repeated introductions of viral lineages into the state. In addition, we show that the increase in frequency of a potentially more transmissible viral variant (614G) over time can potentially be explained by regional mobility differences and multiple introductions of 614G but not the other variant (614D) into the state. At an individual level, we observed evidence of higher viral loads in patients infected with the 614G variant. However, using clinical records data, we did not find any evidence that the 614G variant affects clinical severity or patient outcomes. Overall, this suggests that with regard to D614G, the behavior of individuals has been more important in shaping the course of the pandemic in Washington State than this variant of the virus.

1. Rentzsch P, Schubach M, Shendure J, Kircher M. CADD-Splice—improving genome-wide variant effect prediction using deep learning-derived splice scores. Genome medicine. 2021 Dec;13(1):1-2.
[https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33618777/](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33618777/)

   >Background: Splicing of genomic exons into mRNAs is a critical prerequisite for the accurate synthesis of human proteins. Genetic variants impacting splicing underlie a substantial proportion of genetic disease, but are challenging to identify beyond those occurring at donor and acceptor dinucleotides. To address this, various methods aim to predict variant effects on splicing. Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have been shown to achieve better results in predicting splice variants than other strategies.
Methods: It has been unclear how best to integrate such process-specific scores into genome-wide variant effect predictors. Here, we use a recently published experimental data set to compare several machine learning methods that score variant effects on splicing. We integrate the best of those approaches into general variant effect prediction models and observe the effect on classification of known pathogenic variants.
Results: We integrate two specialized splicing scores into CADD (Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion; cadd.gs.washington.edu ), a widely used tool for genome-wide variant effect prediction that we previously developed to weight and integrate diverse collections of genomic annotations. With this new model, CADD-Splice, we show that inclusion of splicing DNN effect scores substantially improves predictions across multiple variant categories, without compromising overall performance.
Conclusions: While splice effect scores show superior performance on splice variants, specialized predictors cannot compete with other variant scores in general variant interpretation, as the latter account for nonsense and missense effects that do not alter splicing. Although only shown here for splice scores, we believe that the applied approach will generalize to other specific molecular processes, providing a path for the further improvement of genome-wide variant effect prediction.


