---
layout: page
title: Multi-omics Integration
permalink: /MultiOmics_Integration/
---

# Multi-omics Integration

1. Francine E. Garrett-Bakelman, Manjula Darshi3, Stefan J. Green et al. The NASA Twins Study: A multidimensional analysis of a year-long human spaceflight. Science  12 Apr 2019: Vol. 364, Issue 6436, eaau8650 DOI: 10.1126/science.aau8650. 
   
   >To understand the health impact of long-duration spaceflight, one identical twin astronaut was monitored before, during, and after a 1-year mission onboard the International Space Station; his twin served as a genetically matched ground control. Longitudinal assessments identified spaceflight-specific changes, including decreased body mass, telomere elongation, genome instability, carotid artery distension and increased intima-media thickness, altered ocular structure, transcriptional and metabolic changes, DNA methylation changes in immune and oxidative stress–related pathways, gastrointestinal microbiota alterations, and some cognitive decline postflight. Although average telomere length, global gene expression, and microbiome changes returned to near preflight levels within 6 months after return to Earth, increased numbers of short telomeres were observed and expression of some genes was still disrupted. These multiomic, molecular, physiological, and behavioral datasets provide a valuable roadmap of the putative health risks for future human spaceflight.

1. Chen R, Mias GI, Li-Pook-Than J, Jiang L, Lam HY, Chen R, Miriami E, Karczewski KJ, Hariharan M, Dewey FE, Cheng Y, Clark MJ, Im H, Habegger L, Balasubramanian S, O'Huallachain M, Dudley JT, Hillenmeyer S, Haraksingh R, Sharon D, Euskirchen G, Lacroute P, Bettinger K, Boyle AP, Kasowski M, Grubert F, Seki S, Garcia M, Whirl-Carrillo M, Gallardo M, Blasco MA, Greenberg PL, Snyder P, Klein TE, Altman RB, Butte AJ, Ashley EA, Gerstein M, Nadeau KC, Tang H, Snyder M. Personal Omics Profiling Reveals Dynamic Molecular and Medical Phenotypes. Cell. 2012. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22424236.
   
   >Personalized medicine is expected to benefit from combining genomic information with regular monitoring of physiological states by multiple high-throughput methods. Here, we present an integrative personal omics profile (iPOP), an analysis that combines genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic, and autoantibody profiles from a single individual over a 14 month period. Our iPOP analysis revealed various medical risks, including type 2 diabetes, and it also uncovered extensive, dynamic changes in diverse molecular components and biological pathways across healthy and diseased conditions. Extremely high-coverage genomic and transcriptomic data, which provide the basis of our iPOP, revealed extensive heteroallelic changes during healthy and diseased states and an unexpected RNA editing mechanism. This study demonstrates that longitudinal iPOP can be used to interpret healthy and diseased states by connecting genomic information with additional dynamic omics activity.

1. The Cancer Genome Atlas Network. Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast tumours. Nature. 2012 Oct 4;490(7418):61-70. doi: 10.1038/nature11412. Epub 2012 Sep 23. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23000897.

   >We analysed primary breast cancers by genomic DNA copy number arrays, DNA methylation, exome sequencing, messenger RNA arrays, microRNA sequencing and reverse-phase protein arrays. Our ability to integrate information across platforms provided key insights into previously defined gene expression subtypes and demonstrated the existence of four main breast cancer classes when combining data from five platforms, each of which shows significant molecular heterogeneity. The biological finding of the four main breast cancer subtypes caused by different subsets of genetic and epigenetic abnormalities raises the hypothesis that much of the clinically observable plasticity and heterogeneity occurs within, and not across, these major biological subtypes of breast cancer.

1. **BIDS** - T. Nguyen, R. Tagett, D. Diaz, S. Draghici, A novel approach for data integration and disease subtyping. Genome Res. 27, 2025–2039 (2017). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29066617

   >Advances in high-throughput technologies allow for measurements of many types of omics data, yet the meaningful integration of several different data types remains a significant challenge. Another important and difficult problem is the discovery of molecular disease subtypes characterized by relevant clinical differences, such as survival. Here we present a novel approach, called perturbation clustering for data integration and disease subtyping (PINS), which is able to address both challenges. The framework has been validated on thousands of cancer samples, using gene expression, DNA methylation, noncoding microRNA, and copy number variation data available from the Gene Expression Omnibus, the Broad Institute, The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), and the European Genome-Phenome Archive. The approach is sufficiently general to replace existing unsupervised clustering approaches outside the scope of bio-medical research, with the additional ability to integrate multiple types of data.

1. **BIDS** - Hoadley K, Yau C, Hinoue T, ... Laird PW.  Cell-of-origin patterns dominate the molecular classifications of 10,000 Tumors from 33 types of cancer.  Cell, 2018 Apr; 713(2), p291-304. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29625048  

   >We conducted comprehensive integrative molecular analyses of the complete set of tumors in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), consisting of approximately 10,000 specimens and representing 33 types of cancer. We performed molecular clustering using data on chromosome-arm-level aneuploidy, DNA hypermethylation, mRNA, and miRNA expression levels and reverse-phase protein arrays, of which all, except for aneuploidy, revealed clustering primarily organized by histology, tissue type, or anatomic origin. The influence of cell type was evident in DNA-methylation-based clustering, even after excluding sites with known preexisting tissue-type-specific methylation. Integrative clustering further emphasized the dominant role of cell-of-origin patterns. Molecular similarities among histologically or anatomically related cancer types provide a basis for focused pan-cancer analyses, such as pan-gastrointestinal, pan-gynecological, pan-kidney, and pan-squamous cancers, and those related by stemness features, which in turn may inform strategies for future therapeutic development.

1. **BIDS** - Florian Rohart, Benoît Gautier, Amrit Singh, Kim-Anh Lê Cao. mixOmics: An R package for 'omics feature selection and multiple data integration. PLoS Computational Biology. 2017 13(11):e1005752.
[https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29099853/](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29099853/)

   >The advent of high throughput technologies has led to a wealth of publicly available 'omics data coming from different sources, such as transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics. Combining such large-scale biological data sets can lead to the discovery of important biological insights, provided that relevant information can be extracted in a holistic manner. Current statistical approaches have been focusing on identifying small subsets of molecules (a 'molecular signature') to explain or predict biological conditions, but mainly for a single type of 'omics. In addition, commonly used methods are univariate and consider each biological feature independently. We introduce mixOmics, an R package dedicated to the multivariate analysis of biological data sets with a specific focus on data exploration, dimension reduction and visualisation. By adopting a systems biology approach, the toolkit provides a wide range of methods that statistically integrate several data sets at once to probe relationships between heterogeneous 'omics data sets. Our recent methods extend Projection to Latent Structure (PLS) models for discriminant analysis, for data integration across multiple 'omics data or across independent studies, and for the identification of molecular signatures. We illustrate our latest mixOmics integrative frameworks for the multivariate analyses of 'omics data available from the package.
