---
layout: page
title: Others
permalink: /Others/
---

# OTHERS

1. Vilhjálmsson BJ1, Yang J2, Finucane HK, ... Price AL.  Modeling Linkage Disequilibrium Increases Accuracy of Polygenic Risk Scores.  Am J Hum Genet. 2015 Oct 1;97(4):576-92. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26430803

   >Polygenic risk scores have shown great promise in predicting complex disease risk and will become more accurate as training sample sizes increase. The standard approach for calculating risk scores involves linkage disequilibrium (LD)-based marker pruning and applying a p value threshold to association statistics, but this discards information and can reduce predictive accuracy. We introduce LDpred, a method that infers the posterior mean effect size of each marker by using a prior on effect sizes and LD information from an external reference panel. Theory and simulations show that LDpred outperforms the approach of pruning followed by thresholding, particularly at large sample sizes. Accordingly, predicted R(2) increased from 20.1% to 25.3% in a large schizophrenia dataset and from 9.8% to 12.0% in a large multiple sclerosis dataset. A similar relative improvement in accuracy was observed for three additional large disease datasets and for non-European schizophrenia samples. The advantage of LDpred over existing methods will grow as sample sizes increase. 

1. Chauhan, V., Bahrudeen, M.N., Palma, C.S., Baptista, I.S., Almeida, B.L., Dash, S., Kandavalli, V. and Ribeiro, A.S., 2022. Analytical kinetic model of native tandem promoters in e. coli. PLoS Computational Biology, 18(1), p.e1009824.
[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8830795/](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8830795/)

   >Closely spaced promoters in tandem formation are abundant in bacteria. We investigated the evolutionary conservation, biological functions, and the RNA and single-cell protein expression of genes regulated by tandem promoters in E. coli. We also studied the sequence (distance between transcription start sites 'dTSS', pause sequences, and distances from oriC) and potential influence of the input transcription factors of these promoters. From this, we propose an analytical model of gene expression based on measured expression dynamics, where RNAP-promoter occupancy times and dTSS are the key regulators of transcription interference due to TSS occlusion by RNAP at one of the promoters (when dTSS ≤ 35 bp) and RNAP occupancy of the downstream promoter (when dTSS > 35 bp). Occlusion and downstream promoter occupancy are modeled as linear functions of occupancy time, while the influence of dTSS is implemented by a continuous step function, fit to in vivo data on mean single-cell protein numbers of 30 natural genes controlled by tandem promoters. The best-fitting step is at 35 bp, matching the length of DNA occupied by RNAP in the open complex formation. This model accurately predicts the squared coefficient of variation and skewness of the natural single-cell protein numbers as a function of dTSS. Additional predictions suggest that promoters in tandem formation can cover a wide range of transcription dynamics within realistic intervals of parameter values. By accurately capturing the dynamics of these promoters, this model can be helpful to predict the dynamics of new promoters and contribute to the expansion of the repertoire of expression dynamics available to synthetic genetic constructs.

1. Aoki, S.K., Lillacci, G., Gupta, A., Baumschlager, A., Schweingruber, D. and Khammash, M., 2019. A universal biomolecular integral feedback controller for robust perfect adaptation. Nature, 570(7762), pp.533-537.
[https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31217585/](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31217585/)

   >Homeostasis is a recurring theme in biology that ensures that regulated variables robustly-and in some systems, completely-adapt to environmental perturbations. This robust perfect adaptation feature is achieved in natural circuits by using integral control, a negative feedback strategy that performs mathematical integration to achieve structurally robust regulation1,2. Despite its benefits, the synthetic realization of integral feedback in living cells has remained elusive owing to the complexity of the required biological computations. Here we prove mathematically that there is a single fundamental biomolecular controller topology3 that realizes integral feedback and achieves robust perfect adaptation in arbitrary intracellular networks with noisy dynamics. This adaptation property is guaranteed both for the population-average and for the time-average of single cells. On the basis of this concept, we genetically engineer a synthetic integral feedback controller in living cells4 and demonstrate its tunability and adaptation properties. A growth-rate control application in Escherichia coli shows the intrinsic capacity of our integral controller to deliver robustness and highlights its potential use as a versatile controller for regulation of biological variables in uncertain networks. Our results provide conceptual and practical tools in the area of cybergenetics3,5, for engineering synthetic controllers that steer the dynamics of living systems3-9. 


