---
layout: page
title: Pharmacogenomics and Chemoinformatics
permalink: /Pharmacogenomics_and_Chemoinformatics/
---

# PHARMACOGENOMICS/CHEMOINFORMATICS

1. Health Quality Ontario. 2017 Pharmacogenomic Testing for Psychotropic Medication Selection: A Systematic Review of the Assurex GeneSight Psychotropic Test. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28515818.

   >A large proportion of the Ontario population lives with a diagnosed mental illness. Nearly 5% of Ontarians have major depressive disorder, and another 5% have another type of depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, anxiety, or some other disorder not otherwise specified. Medications are commonly used to treat mental illness, but choosing the right medication for each patient is challenging, and more than 40% of patients discontinue their medication within 90 days because of adverse effects or lack of response. The Assurex GeneSight Psychotropic test is a pharmacogenomic panel that provides clinicians with a report to guide medication selection that is unique to each patient based on their individual genetic profile. However, it is uncertain whether guided treatment using GeneSight is effective compared with unguided treatment (usual care). Following testing and analyzing results, there is uncertainty about the use of GeneSight Psychotropic pharmacogenomic genetic panel to guide medication selection. It was associated with improvements in some patient outcomes, but not others. As well, confidence in these findings is low because of limitations in the body of evidence.

1. Noel M O'Boyle, Michael Banck, Craig A James, Chris Morley, Tim Vandermeersch, Geoffrey R Hutchison.  2011. Open Babel: An open chemical toolbox. Journal of Cheminformatics December 2011, 3:33. https://jcheminf.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/1758-2946-3-33.

   >A frequent problem in computational modeling is the interconversion of chemical structures between different formats. While standard interchange formats exist (for example, Chemical Markup Language) and de facto standards have arisen (for example, SMILES format), the need to interconvert formats is a continuing problem due to the multitude of different application areas for chemistry data, differences in the data stored by different formats (0D versus 3D, for example), and competition between software along with a lack of vendor-neutral formats. We discuss, for the first time, Open Babel, an open-source chemical toolbox that speaks the many languages of chemical data. Open Babel presents a solution to the proliferation of multiple chemical file formats. In addition, it provides a variety of useful utilities from conformer searching and 2D depiction, to filtering, batch conversion, and substructure and similarity searching. For developers, it can be used as a programming library to handle chemical data in areas such as organic chemistry, drug design, materials science, and computational chemistry. 

1. Yang W, Soares J, Greninger P, Edelman EJ, Lightfoot H, Forbes S, Bindal N, Beare D, Smith JA, Thompson IR, Ramaswamy S, Futreal PA, Haber DA, Stratton MR, Benes C, McDermott Uand Garnett MJ.  Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC): a resource for therapeutic biomarker discovery in cancer cells. Nucleic acids research 2013;41;Database issue;D955-61. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23180760.

   >Alterations in cancer genomes strongly influence clinical responses to treatment and in many instances are potent biomarkers for response to drugs. The Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC) database (www.cancerRxgene.org) is the largest public resource for information on drug sensitivity in cancer cells and molecular markers of drug response. Data are freely available without restriction. GDSC currently contains drug sensitivity data for almost 75 000 experiments, describing response to 138 anticancer drugs across almost 700 cancer cell lines. Graphical representations of the data are used throughout with links to related resources and all datasets are fully downloadable. GDSC provides a unique resource incorporating large drug sensitivity and genomic datasets to facilitate the discovery of new therapeutic biomarkers for cancer therapies.

1. Iorio F, Knijnenburg TA, Vis DJ, Bignell GR, Menden MP, Schubert M, Aben N, Gonçalves E, Barthorpe S, Lightfoot H, Cokelaer T, Greninger P, van Dyk E, Chang H, de Silva H, Heyn H, Deng X, Egan RK, Liu Q, Mironenko T, Mitropoulos X, Richardson L, Wang J, Zhang T, Moran S, Sayols S, Soleimani M, Tamborero D, Lopez-Bigas N, Ross-Macdonald P, Esteller M, Gray NS, Haber DA, Stratton MR, Benes CH, Wessels LFA, Saez-Rodriguez J, McDermott U, Garnett MJ. A. Landscape of Pharmacogenomic Interactions in Cancer.  Cell. 2016 Jul 28;166(3):740-754. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.06.017. Epub 2016 Jul 7. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27397505.

   >Systematic studies of cancer genomes have provided unprecedented insights into the molecular nature of cancer. Using this information to guide the development and application of therapies in the clinic is challenging. Here, we report how cancer-driven alterations identified in 11,289 tumors from 29 tissues (integrating somatic mutations, copy number alterations, DNA methylation, and gene expression) can be mapped onto 1,001 molecularly annotated human cancer cell lines and correlated with sensitivity to 265 drugs. Our analysis and datasets are rich resources to link genotypes with cellular phenotypes and to identify therapeutic options for selected cancer sub-populations.

1. Zhao B1, Sedlak JC2, Srinivas R3, Creixell P4, Pritchard JR5, Tidor B6, Lauffenburger DA7, Hemann MT. 2016. Exploiting Temporal Collateral Sensitivity in Tumor Clonal Evolution. Cell. 2016 Mar 24;165(1):234-246. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.01.045. Epub 2016 Feb 25. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26924578.

   >The prevailing approach to addressing secondary drug resistance in cancer focuses on treating the resistance mechanisms at relapse. However, the dynamic nature of clonal evolution, along with potential fitness costs and cost compensations, may present exploitable vulnerabilities-a notion that we term "temporal collateral sensitivity." Using a combined pharmacological screen and drug resistance selection approach in a murine model of Ph(+) acute lymphoblastic leukemia, we indeed find that temporal and/or persistent collateral sensitivity to non-classical BCR-ABL1 drugs arises in emergent tumor subpopulations during the evolution of resistance toward initial treatment with BCR-ABL1-targeted inhibitors. We determined the sensitization mechanism via genotypic, phenotypic, signaling, and binding measurements in combination with computational models and demonstrated significant overall survival extension in mice. Additional stochastic mathematical models and small-molecule screens extended our insights, indicating the value of focusing on evolutionary trajectories and pharmacological profiles to identify new strategies to treat dynamic tumor vulnerabilities.

1. Mehreen Ali, Suleiman A. Khan, Krister Wennerberg and Tero Aittokallio.  2017. Global proteomics profiling improves drug sensitivity prediction: results from a multiomics, pan-cancer modeling approach. Bioinformatics, 2017, 1–10. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29186355.

   >Our results in two cell-line panels demonstrate how MS profiling improves drug response predictions beyond that of the RPPA or the other omics profiles when used alone. However, frequent missing MS data values complicate its use in predictive modeling and required additional filtering, such as focusing on completely measured or known oncoproteins, to obtain maximal predictive performance. Rather strikingly, the two proteomics profiles provided complementary predictive signal both for the cytotoxic and targeted compounds. Further, information about the cellular-abundance of primary target proteins was found critical for predicting the response of targeted compounds, although the non-target features also contributed significantly to the predictive power. The clinical relevance of the selected protein markers was confirmed in cancer patient data. These results provide novel insights into the relative performance and optimal use of the widely applied proteomic technologies, MS and RPPA, which should prove useful in translational applications, such as defining the best combination of omics technologies and marker panels for understanding and predicting drug sensitivities in cancer patients

1. J Yang, H Tang, Y Li, R Zhong, T Wang, STC Wong, G Xiao, Y Xie. 2015. DIGRE: Drug-Induced Genomic Residual Effect Model for Successful Prediction of Multidrug Effects. CPT Pharmacometrics Syst. Pharmacol. (2015) 4, 91–97; doi:10.1002/psp4.1. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4360668/.

   >Multidrug regimens are a promising strategy for improving therapeutic efficacy and reducing side effects, especially for complex disorders such as cancer. However, the use of multidrug therapies is very challenging, due to a lack of understanding of the mechanisms of drug interactions. We herein present a novel computational approach—Drug-Induced Genomic Residual Effect (DIGRE) Computational Model—to predict drug combination effects by explicitly modeling drug response curves and gene expression changes after drug treatments. The prediction performance of DIGRE was evaluated using two datasets: (i) OCI-LY3 B-lymphoma cells treated with 14 different drugs and (ii) MCF breast cancer cells treated with combinations of gefitinib and docetaxel at different doses. In both datasets, the predicted drug combination effects significantly correlated with the experimental results. The results indicated the model was useful in predicting drug combination effects, which may greatly facilitate the discovery of new, effective multidrug therapies.

1. Aravind Subramanian, Rajiv Narayan, Steven M. Corsello, David D. Peck, Ted E. Natoli, Xiaodong Lu, Joshua Gould, John F. Davis, Andrew A. Tubelli, Jacob K. Asiedu, David L. Lahr, Jodi E. Hirschman, Zihan Liu, Melanie Donahue, Bina Julian, Mariya Khan, David Wadden, Ian C. Smith, Daniel Lam, Arthur Liberzon, Courtney Toder, Mukta Bagul, Marek Orzechowski, Oana M. Enache, Federica Piccioni, Sarah A. Johnson, Nicholas J. Lyons, Alice H. Berger, Alykhan F. Shamji, Angela N. Brooks, Anita Vrcic, Corey Flynn, Jacqueline Rosains, David Y. Takeda, Roger Hu, Desiree Davison, Justin Lamb, Kristin Ardlie, Larson Hogstrom, Peyton Greenside, Nathanael S. Gray, Paul A. Clemons, Serena Silver, Xiaoyun Wu, Wen-Ning Zhao, Willis Read-Button, Xiaohua Wu, Stephen J. Haggarty, Lucienne V. Ronco, Jesse S. Boehm, Stuart L. Schreiber, John G. Doench, Joshua A. Bittker, David E. Root, Bang Wong, Todd R. Golub.  A Next Generation Connectivity Map: L1000 Platform and the First 1,000,000 Profiles.  Cell, 2017, 171(6):1437-1452 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29195078

   >We previously piloted the concept of a Connectivity Map (CMap), whereby genes, drugs, and disease states are connected by virtue of common gene-expression signatures. Here, we report more than a 1,000-fold scale-up of the CMap as part of the NIH LINCS Consortium, made possible by a new, low-cost, high-throughput reduced representation expression profiling method that we term L1000. We show that L1000 is highly reproducible, comparable to RNA sequencing, and suitable for computational inference of the expression levels of 81% of non-measured transcripts. We further show that the expanded CMap can be used to discover mechanism of action of small molecules, functionally annotate genetic variants of disease genes, and inform clinical trials. The 1.3 million L1000 profiles described here, as well as tools for their analysis, are available at https://clue.io.
