---
layout: page
title: Proteomics and Metabolomics
permalink: /Proteomics_and_Metabolomics/
---

# PROTEOMICS AND METABOLOMICS

1. Kadoch C, Hargreaves DC, Hodges C, Elias L, Ho L, Ranish J, Crabtree GR.
Proteomic and bioinformatic analysis of mammalian SWI/SNF complexes identifies
extensive roles in human malignancy. Nat Genet. 2013 Jun;45(6):592-601.
[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23644491](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23644491)

      >Subunits of mammalian SWI/SNF (mSWI/SNF or BAF) complexes have recently been implicated as tumor suppressors in human malignancies. To understand the full extent of their involvement, we conducted a proteomic analysis of endogenous mSWI/SNF complexes, which identified several new dedicated, stable subunits not found in yeast SWI/SNF complexes, including BCL7A, BCL7B and BCL7C, BCL11A and BCL11B, BRD9 and SS18. Incorporating these new members, we determined mSWI/SNF subunit mutation frequency in exome and whole-genome sequencing studies of primary human tumors. Notably, mSWI/SNF subunits are mutated in 19.6% of all human tumors reported in 44 studies. Our analysis suggests that specific subunits protect against cancer in specific tissues. In addition, mutations affecting more than one subunit, defined here as compound heterozygosity, are prevalent in certain cancers. Our studies demonstrate that mSWI/SNF is the most frequently mutated chromatin-regulatory complex (CRC) in human cancer, exhibiting a broad mutation pattern, similar to that of TP53. Thus, proper functioning of polymorphic BAF complexes may constitute a major mechanism of tumor suppression.

1. Sauer, U., ‘Real-time metabolome profiling of the metabolic switch between starvation and growth,’ Nature Methods (2015) doi:10.1038/ nmeth.3584. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26366986.

      >Metabolic systems are often the first networks to respond to environmental changes, and the ability to monitor metabolite dynamics is key for understanding these cellular responses. Because monitoring metabolome changes is experimentally tedious and demanding, dynamic data on time scales from seconds to hours are scarce. Here we describe real-time metabolome profiling by direct injection of living bacteria, yeast or mammalian cells into a high-resolution mass spectrometer, which enables automated monitoring of about 300 compounds in 15-30-s cycles over several hours. We observed accumulation of energetically costly biomass metabolites in Escherichia coli in carbon starvation-induced stationary phase, as well as the rapid use of these metabolites upon growth resumption. By combining real-time metabolome profiling with modeling and inhibitor experiments, we obtained evidence for switch-like feedback inhibition in amino acid biosynthesis and for control of substrate availability through the preferential use of the metabolically cheaper one-step salvaging pathway over costly ten-step de novo purine biosynthesis during growth resumption.

1. Mathias Wilhelm, Judith Schlegl, Hannes Hahne, Amin Moghaddas Gholami, Marcus Lieberenz, Mikhail M. Savitski, Emanuel Ziegler, Lars Butzmann, Siegfried Gessulat, Harald Marx, Toby Mathieson, Simone Lemeer, Karsten Schnatbaum, Ulf Reimer, Holger Wenschuh, Martin Mollenhauer, Julia Slotta-Huspenina, Joos-Hendrik Boese, Marcus Bantscheff, Anja Gerstmair, Franz Faerber & Bernhard Kuster. 2014.  Mass-spectrometry-based draft of the human proteome. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24870543.

      >Proteomes are characterized by large protein-abundance differences, cell-type- and time-dependent expression patterns and post-translational modifications, all of which carry biological information that is not accessible by genomics or transcriptomics. Here we present a mass-spectrometry-based draft of the human proteome and a public, high-performance, in-memory database for real-time analysis of terabytes of big data, called ProteomicsDB. The information assembled from human tissues, cell lines and body fluids enabled estimation of the size of the protein-coding genome, and identified organ-specific proteins and a large number of translated lincRNAs (long intergenic non-coding RNAs). Analysis of messenger RNA and protein-expression profiles of human tissues revealed conserved control of protein abundance, and integration of drug-sensitivity data enabled the identification of proteins predicting resistance or sensitivity. The proteome profiles also hold considerable promise for analysing the composition and stoichiometry of protein complexes; thus, ProteomicsDB enables navigation of proteomes, provides biological insight and fosters the development of proteomic technology.

 1. Min-Sik Kim, Sneha M. Pinto[…]Akhilesh Pandey. 2014.  A draft map of the human proteome. Nature volume509, pages575–581 (29 May 2014)  doi:10.1038/nature13302. https://www.nature.com/articles/nature13302.

      >The availability of human genome sequence has transformed biomedical research over the past decade. However, an equivalent map for the human proteome with direct measurements of proteins and peptides does not exist yet. Here we present a draft map of the human proteome using high-resolution Fourier-transform mass spectrometry. In-depth proteomic profiling of 30 histologically normal human samples, including 17 adult tissues, 7 fetal tissues and 6 purified primary haematopoietic cells, resulted in identification of proteins encoded by 17,294 genes accounting for approximately 84% of the total annotated protein-coding genes in humans. A unique and comprehensive strategy for proteogenomic analysis enabled us to discover a number of novel protein-coding regions, which includes translated pseudogenes, non-coding RNAs and upstream open reading frames. This large human proteome catalogue (available as an interactive web-based resource at http://www.humanproteomemap.org) will complement available human genome and transcriptome data to accelerate biomedical research in health and disease.

1. MSQuant, an open source platform for mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics. 2010. Mortensen P1, Gouw JW, Olsen JV, Ong SE, Rigbolt KT, Bunkenborg J, Cox J, Foster LJ, Heck AJ, Blagoev B, Andersen JS, Mann M. Author information. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19888749.

      >Mass spectrometry-based proteomics critically depends on algorithms for data interpretation. A current bottleneck in the rapid advance of proteomics technology is the closed nature and slow development cycle of vendor-supplied software solutions. We have created an open source software environment, called MSQuant, which allows visualization and validation of peptide identification results directly on the raw mass spectrometric data. MSQuant iteratively recalibrates MS data thereby significantly increasing mass accuracy leading to fewer false positive peptide identifications. MSQuant is available, including an installer and supporting scripts, at http://msquant.sourceforge.net .

1. Building ProteomeTools based on a complete synthetic human proteome. Zolg DP, Wilhelm M, Schnatbaum K, Zerweck J, Knaute T, Delanghe B, Bailey DJ, Gessulat S, Ehrlich HC, Weininger M, Yu P, Schlegl J, Kramer K, Schmidt T, Kusebauch U, Deutsch EW, Aebersold R, Moritz RL, Wenschuh H, Moehring T, Aiche S, Huhmer A, Reimer U, Kuster B.Nat Methods. 2017 Mar;14(3):259-262. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.4153. Epub 2017 Jan 30.PMID: 28135259. https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth.4153.

      >We describe ProteomeTools, a project building molecular and digital tools from the human proteome to facilitate biomedical research. Here we report the generation and multimodal liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry analysis of >330,000 synthetic tryptic peptides representing essentially all canonical human gene products, and we exemplify the utility of these data in several applications. The resource (available at http://www.proteometools.org) will be extended to >1 million peptides, and all data will be shared with the community via ProteomicsDB and ProteomeXchange.

1. Human SRMAtlas: A Resource of Targeted Assays to Quantify the Complete Human Proteome. Kusebauch U1, Campbell DS1, Deutsch EW1, Chu CS1, Spicer DA1, Brusniak MY1, Slagel J1, Sun Z1, Stevens J1, Grimes B1, Shteynberg D1, Hoopmann MR1, Blattmann P2, Ratushny AV3, Rinner O4, Picotti P2, Carapito C2, Huang CY1, Kapousouz M1, Lam H5, Tran T1, Demir E6, Aitchison JD3, Sander C6, Hood L1, Aebersold R7, Moritz RL8. Cell. 2016 Jul 28;166(3):766-778. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.06.041. Epub 2016 Jul 21. PMID: 27453469 PMCID: PMC5245710 DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.06.041. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27453469.

      >The ability to reliably and reproducibly measure any protein of the human proteome in any tissue or cell type would be transformative for understanding systems-level properties as well as specific pathways in physiology and disease. Here, we describe the generation and verification of a compendium of highly specific assays that enable quantification of 99.7% of the 20,277 annotated human proteins by the widely accessible, sensitive, and robust targeted mass spectrometric method selected reaction monitoring, SRM. This human SRMAtlas provides definitive coordinates that conclusively identify the respective peptide in biological samples. We report data on 166,174 proteotypic peptides providing multiple, independent assays to quantify any human protein and numerous spliced variants, non-synonymous mutations, and post-translational modifications. The data are freely accessible as a resource at http://www.srmatlas.org/, and we demonstrate its utility by examining the network response to inhibition of cholesterol synthesis in liver cells and to docetaxel in prostate cancer lines.

1. Zhang H, Liu T, Zhang Z, Payne SH, Zhang B, McDermott JE, Zhou JY, Petyuk VA, Chen L, Ray D, Sun S, Yang F, Chen L, Wang J, Shah P, Cha SW, Aiyetan P, Woo S, Tian Y, Gritsenko MA, Clauss TR, Choi C, Monroe ME, Thomas S, Nie S, et al.. Integrated Proteogenomic Characterization of Human High-Grade Serous Ovarian Cancer. Cell. 2016 Jul 28;166(3):755-765. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.05.069. Epub 2016 Jun 29. https://www.cell.com/cell/abstract/S0092-8674(16)30673-0.

      >To provide a detailed analysis of the molecular components and underlying mechanisms associated with ovarian cancer, we performed a comprehensive mass-spectrometry-based proteomic characterization of 174 ovarian tumors previously analyzed by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), of which 169 were high-grade serous carcinomas (HGSCs). Integrating our proteomic measurements with the genomic data yielded a number of insights into disease, such as how different copy-number alternations influence the proteome, the proteins associated with chromosomal instability, the sets of signaling pathways that diverse genome rearrangements converge on, and the ones most associated with short overall survival. Specific protein acetylations associated with homologous recombination deficiency suggest a potential means for stratifying patients for therapy. In addition to providing a valuable resource, these findings provide a view of how the somatic genome drives the cancer proteome and associations between protein and post-translational modification levels and clinical outcomes in HGSC.

1. Human Microbiome Project Consortium. Nature. 2012 Jun 13;486(7402):207-14. doi: 10.1038/nature11234.  Structure, function and diversity of the healthy human microbiome. https://www.nature.com/articles/nature11234.

      >Studies of the human microbiome have revealed that even healthy individuals differ remarkably in the microbes that occupy habitats such as the gut, skin and vagina. Much of this diversity remains unexplained, although diet, environment, host genetics and early microbial exposure have all been implicated. Accordingly, to characterize the ecology of human-associated microbial communities, the Human Microbiome Project has analysed the largest cohort and set of distinct, clinically relevant body habitats so far. We found the diversity and abundance of each habitat’s signature microbes to vary widely even among healthy subjects, with strong niche specialization both within and among individuals. Metagenomic carriage of metabolic pathways was stable among individuals despite variation in community structure, and ethnic/racial background proved to be one of the strongest associations of both pathways and microbes with clinical metadata. These results thus delineate the range of structural and functional configurations normal in the microbial communities of a healthy population, enabling future characterization of the epidemiology, ecology and translational applications of the human microbiome.
